1 Why we need to do statistics in the first place

When analysing data we hope to learn something about the state of the world. We don’t care about the dataset specifically, but rather about the relationships that we hope to learn from it. When showing two designs to two groups of users we want to learn which design is preferred by all visitors of the website, instead of just the preference of the people who ended up in our AB test. Probably without completely realising it, we are constantly making inferences from a sample to a population.  

The biggest foe of inference from data to population, is variance in the thing we measure that is caused by other sources than the one we are interested in. If we want to know if the new design is better than the old design, we measure the click-through-rate of users that were shown one of the designs. If design would be the only thing that determines if a user clicked or not, it would very easy to confirm which design is better. The click-through-rate of one design would be 0 and of the other would be 1. Of course, design is not the only thing determining the click-through. A motivated user would click irrespective of the quality of the design, and someone who is just casually browsing wouldn’t click even on the best possible design. User motivation therefore is a factor that gets in the way of measuring which design is best. 

The variance in the thing we measure that is not caused by the variable we are interested in goes by many names, such as error variance, randomness and noise. Whatever we call it, it causes us to be unsure of the effect of the variable under study. We see that in the sample the new design performs better, but is this really caused by the quality of the design or did we happen to have more motivated people in the right group by chance? This is exactly the type of question for which we invoke statistics. It quantifies the uncertainty we have on our estimate, thereby providing a probability for all the possible values of the thing we are interested in. If the click-through-rate in the sample happens to be 0.43, statistics will tell us the probability that the true click-through-rate for example is 0.42 (which will be high) or is 0.17 (which will be very low). 