3 Why your sample needs to be representative 

Whether you are aware of it or not, when doing data analysis you generalise the results in your sample to the entire population of people you are interested in. We say “the user has a greater satisfaction with funda when this feature is implemented” instead of “the 714 people who happen to be in our sample have a greater satisfaction with funda”. This is, of course, the aim of doing research in the first place, we want to know what all people think, not just a subset. We discussed earlier that we need a sufficient number of cases in our sample to rule out that the effect is caused by chance. Fortunately, statistical inference formalises the probability that the effect is artificial due to a sample that is too small. 

However, it does not guard us against generalising to the incorrect population. If we want to know what all realtors in the Netherlands think of the new service we are about to introduce and we test feature only with realtors in Amsterdam because they happen to be close to the office, we have a generalisation problem. Realtors in Amsterdam probably serve a very different market and have a different personality than those active in more rural parts of the country. Taking such a convenience sample can create major flaws in our knowledge. 

In the most ideal scenario, every single person in the population has the exact same probability to be included in our sample. This is seldom the case. For instance, running an A/B test for a few weeks selects a limited group of users, even when all the users in the group have an equal probability to be included. The test was only conducted in a certain month of the year, while the housing market was at a high or a low. It is unlikely this limits the generalisation of the results when we are comparing two designs. But what about testing two different prices of a new product?  

As said, a complete random sample out of the entire population is seldom attainable. But the analyst has the responsibility to create as little generalisation bias as possible. As part of the analysis results you should always give full disclosure about how the sample was constructed and if you foresee problems with generalisation. These sample characteristics are intrinsically part of your results and should therefore always be reported alongside the statistical findings. 