5 Some practical tips for doing an analysis 

In spite of its halo of objectivity and scientificity, doing a data analysis comes with choices by the analyst. Do we include or exclude new build when analysing the difference profitability of two groups of brokers? Do we test a new campaign on all our users or just the serious ones? These choices influence the outcome of the analysis, and therefore are part of it. Always report these choices alongside the results, by including them in the report.  

Because of the subjective element in data analysis, it is always a good idea to have it reviewed before sharing the research. Just as code gets reviewed by a fresh pair of eyes before it is sent to production. Everyone doing an analysis hopes it will result in a find that will bring significant benefit to the business (and a little bit of fame for you). This might make you vulnerable for bad choices along the way that give more favourable results or ignoring uncertainty we have on an estimates, reporting it with more certainty then we should. (Yes, even data scientists are susceptable to this, we all want to come up with new things). Discussing your analysis with a critical other will safeguard you against turning hopes in false results. The reviewer should be just as responsible for the results as the analyst, so he / she cannot casually glance over the results. After all devoting time and other resources to fake findings is more harmful than concluding we are not convinced the effect is there. 

Speaking of these so-called null findings, they might not be as sexy as the discovery of a large, game-changing effect, but they contribute to collective knowledge as well. It is therefore essential to share these results in the same manner as you would do with found effects. They might bust long-existing myths about the business and often result in new research questions. Take pride in doing an analysis thoroughly and report the result whatever it is. 

Finally, to create a steady and trustworthy knowledge base, we should make sure that the analyses done are reproducible. We should always be able to trace exactly where the results are coming from, even a while after the analysis was done. The best way to create a reproducible result is by doing the analysis using a scripting language. Every step along the way is then saved in the script and the analysis is then reproduced by rerunning the script. However, not everyone has the time available that should be invested to learn a scripting language. Many analyses are done by point and click tools, such as Google Analytics or Excel. Reproducibility of important insights could then be assured by creating a README in which the steps taken are documented. How you do it is not important, but it is crucial to make your analysis reproducible. As a check ask yourself the question: If I left the company, would someone else a year from now be able to redo the analysis and arrive at the same results? If the answer for some reason is no, take all the necessary steps to make sure it is yes.